Source: Frequently Asked Questions, Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB PM-JAY),
official portal of Ayushman Bharat Haryana, Government of Haryana (content sourced from National
Health Authority guidelines). Downloaded from ayushmanbharat.haryana.gov.in.

Frequently Asked Questions under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana

1. What is Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana?
Ayushman Bharat, a flagship scheme of Government of India, was launched as recommended by the
National Health Policy 2017, to achieve the vision of Universal Health Coverage (UHC). This
initiative has been designed to meet Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and its underlining
commitment, which is to "leave no one behind." Ayushman Bharat is an attempt to move from
sectoral and segmented approach of health service delivery to a comprehensive need-based health
care service. This scheme aims to undertake path breaking interventions to holistically address
the healthcare system (covering prevention, promotion and ambulatory care) at the primary,
secondary and tertiary level. Ayushman Bharat adopts a continuum of care approach, comprising of
two inter-related components, which are: Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs), and Pradhan Mantri
Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY).

2. What are the benefits of Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana?
PM-JAY provides cashless cover of up to INR 5,00,000 to each eligible family per annum for listed
secondary and tertiary care conditions. The cover under the scheme includes all expenses incurred
on the following components of the treatment: medical examination, treatment and consultation;
pre-hospitalization; medicine and medical consumables; non-intensive and intensive care services;
diagnostic and laboratory investigations; medical implantation services (where necessary);
accommodation benefits; food services; complications arising during treatment; post-
hospitalization follow-up care up to 15 days. The benefits of INR 5,00,000 are on a family
floater basis, which means that it can be used by one or all members of the family, with no cap
on family size or age of members. Pre-existing diseases are covered from the very first day.

3. What is the maximum benefit size in Rupees under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya
Yojana?
PM-JAY provides cashless cover of up to INR 5,00,000 to each eligible family per annum for listed
secondary and tertiary care conditions.

4. Can I have to pay any amount beyond the wallet size under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan
Arogya Yojana?
PM-JAY provides cashless cover of up to INR 5,00,000 only to each eligible family per annum for
listed secondary and tertiary care conditions. Any amount incurred in respect to medical expenses
beyond Rs. 5,00,000 per year per family has to be borne by the beneficiary.

5. How many packages are covered under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana?
There are 874 packages and 1592 procedures under PM-JAY.

6. Who were the beneficiaries of Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana?
At present those persons will be considered as beneficiary of the Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri
Jan Arogya Yojana who were covered under specific categories of SECC-2011 database of Govt. of
India.

7. What are the most common documents for checking the eligibility for Ayushman Bharat Pradhan
Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana?
PM/CM entitlement letter; Ration Card; Aadhaar Card for identification only.

8. Is there any Income criteria for eligibility under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya
Yojana? Can I take any benefits if I am not covered in SECC-2011 database?
No.

9. Can I check on-line for my eligibility under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana?
https://mera.pmjay.gov.in/search/login

10. What is the process for inclusion of beneficiaries of Haryana Mukhyamantri Antyodaya Parivar
Utthan Yojana?
The beneficiaries under Mukhyamantri Antyodaya Parivar Utthan Yojana whose annual family income
is less than 1.80 Lakh are eligible for availing benefits under AB-PMJAY. The eligible
beneficiaries do not require to submit any request letter / entitlement letter. They can get
their Ayushman Bharat card at Ayushman Kiosk in all PMJAY empanelled hospitals and from the
Common Services Centers (CSC).

11. From where a beneficiary can get Ayushman card?
Beneficiary can get their Ayushman Bharat card at Ayushman Kiosk in all PMJAY empanelled
hospitals and from the Common Services Centers (CSC).

12. From where a beneficiary can get benefits of Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya
Yojana?
Beneficiaries can avail the benefits of Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana in all
Government Hospitals, CHC, PHC and any other empanelled private hospitals.

13. Does the scheme cover OPD services?
No.

14. Can I check the list of hospitals in and around my district online?
Yes, here is the website link: https://hospitals.pmjay.gov.in/Search/

15. Can I take benefits on national portability basis?
Yes.

16. Can I raise any grievance against any hospitals/person?
Yes, here is the website link: https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in/GRMS/loginnew.htm

17. Is there any State/National toll free number?
Toll-Free Call Center Number: 14555 / 1800111565 / 18001802415.
