Source: Operational Guidelines, PM-KISAN Scheme, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare,
Government of India (revised as on 29.03.2020). Downloaded from pmkisan.gov.in.

PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMMAN NIDHI SCHEME
(PM-KISAN SCHEME)
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES
(REVISED AS ON 29.03.2020)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS' WELFARE
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION & FARMERS' WELFARE
(DAC&FW)

PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMMAN NIDHI (PM-KISAN) SCHEME
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES

1. Scheme
With a view to provide income support to all landholding farmers' families in the country,
having cultivable land, the Central Government has implemented a Central Sector
Scheme, namely, "Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN)".

2. Objective and Benefits
The scheme aims to supplement the financial needs of all landholding farmers' families
in procuring various inputs to ensure proper crop health and appropriate yields,
commensurate with the anticipated farm income as well as for domestic needs. Under
the Scheme an amount of Rs.6000/- per year is released by the Central Government
online directly into the bank accounts of the eligible farmers under Direct Benefit
Transfer mode, subject to certain exclusions.

3. Definition of farmer's family
A landholder farmer's family is defined as "a family comprising of husband, wife
and minor children who owns cultivable land as per land records of the concerned
State/UT". The existing land-ownership system will be used for identification of
beneficiaries for calculation of benefit.

4 Exclusions
4.1 The following categories of beneficiaries of higher economic status shall not be
eligible for benefit under the scheme:
(a) All Institutional Land holders; and
(b) Farmer families in which one or more of its members belong to following
categories:
i) Former and present holders of constitutional posts
ii) Former and present Ministers / State Ministers and former / present Members of
Lok Sabha / Rajya Sabha / State Legislative Assemblies / State Legislative
Councils, former and present Mayors of Municipal Corporations, former and
present Chairpersons of District Panchayats.
iii) All serving or retired officers and employees of Central / State Government
Ministries / Offices / Departments and their field units, Central or State PSEs and
Attached offices / Autonomous Institutions under Government as well as regular
employees of the Local Bodies (Excluding Multi Tasking Staff / Class IV / Group
D employees)
iv) All superannuated / retired pensioners whose monthly pension is Rs.10,000/- or
more (Excluding Multi Tasking Staff / Class IV / Group D employees)
v) All Persons who paid Income Tax in last assessment year.
vi) Professionals like Doctors, Engineers, Lawyers, Chartered Accountants, and
Architects registered with Professional bodies and carrying out profession by
undertaking practices.
(c) In case of new beneficiaries being uploaded on the PM-KISAN Portal, all land
holding farmers' families who are Non-resident Indians (NRIs) in terms of the provisions
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 shall be excluded from any benefit under the Scheme.

4.2 For the purpose of exclusion State / UT Governments can certify the eligibility of
the beneficiaries based on self declaration by the beneficiaries. In case beneficiary is
not available / does not reside in the village, State / UT Governments may consider
certification based on the declaration by other adult member of his / her family. In case
of incorrect self declaration, beneficiary shall be liable for recovery of transferred
financial benefit and other penal actions as per law.

5. Methodology for calculation of benefit
5.1 The benefit shall be paid to only those farmers' families whose names are
entered into the land records. Exception has, however, been made for North-East
States and Jharkhand in this regard.

5.2 The cut-off date for determination of eligibility of beneficiaries under the scheme
shall be 01.02.2019 and no changes thereafter shall be considered for eligibility of
benefit under the scheme for next 5 years. However, this date is not applicable when
transfer of ownership of cultivable land takes place on account of succession due to
death.

5.3 Benefit will be allowed in those cases where transfer of ownership of cultivable
land takes place on account of succession due to death of the landowner. However,
those eligible farmers whose names have been entered in the land record after
01.12.2018 till 01.02.2019 shall be eligible for the benefits from the date of entry of land
rights in the land records.

6. Strategy for Implementation
6.1 The States shall prepare database of eligible beneficiary land holder farmer
families in the villages capturing the Name, Age, Gender, Category (SC/ST), Aadhaar
Number, Bank Account Number and the Mobile Number of the beneficiaries.
Responsibility of identifying the land holder farmer family eligible for benefit under the
scheme shall be of the State / UT Government. In case of beneficiaries in States of
Assam, Meghalaya, J&K where Aadhaar number has not been issued to most of the
citizens, Aadhaar number shall be collected for those beneficiaries where it is available
and for others alternate prescribed documents such as Driving Licence, Voters' ID Card,
NREGA Job Card, or any other identification documents issued by Central / State / UT
Governments or their authorities, etc. can be collected for identity verification purposes.

7. Review, Monitoring and Grievance Redressal Mechanism
7.1 There will be stratified review / monitoring mechanism at National, State and
District Level. At the National level, the Review Committee will be headed by Cabinet
Secretary. The States shall notify the State and District Level Review / Monitoring
Committee.
7.2 The States shall also notify State and District Level Grievance Redressal
Monitoring Committees for looking into all the grievances related to implementation of
the scheme. Any grievances or complaints which are received should be disposed off
on merit preferably within two weeks time.

9. PM-Kisan Portal for implementation of the scheme (Beneficiary Details
uploading by State)
9.1 Beneficiaries under the scheme are to be identified by the respective State and
Union Territory. The details of farmers are being maintained by the States / UTs either
in electronic form or in manual register. To make integrated platform available in the
country to assist in benefit transfer, a platform named PM-Kisan Portal available at
URL (http://pmkisan.gov.in) has been launched for uploading the farmers' details
at a single web-portal in a uniform structure.

9.3 PM-Kisan Portal:
The following farmer attributes need to be entered in the Portal:
Farmer Attributes (Essential):
State, District, Sub-District/Block, Village, Farmer Name, Type of Identity –
Aadhaar Number and in case Aadhaar not available, Aadhaar enrollment number
with any other ID proof like Voter ID etc, Gender, Category, IFSC Code, Bank
Account Number.
Farmer Attributes (Optional):
Father name, Address, Mobile Number, Date of Birth/Age, Farm-Size in Hectare,
Survey Number, Khasra Number.

10 Modalities for transfer of benefit
10.1 The financial benefit of Rs.6000/- per year is to be released to the eligible
farmers in three installments of Rs.2000/- each every 4-month / trimester, i.e. April-July,
August-November and December-March.

10.2 The Scheme is being implemented through an Aadhaar linked electronic data
base containing details of all members of the families of the farmers whose names
appear in the land records. For transfer of the financial benefits to the eligible farmers,
Aadhaar number shall be collected for all beneficiaries. However, exemption has been
given to the States of Assam, Meghalaya and Jammu & Kashmir from the requirement of
Aadhaar number and Aadhaar seeded database under the scheme till 31.3.2021.

10.4 The funds pertaining to income support benefit as well as administrative charges
shall be released from Government of India to the State designated account /
mechanism. Detailed modalities for transfer of funds are as under:
(a) The amount due to the beneficiaries under the scheme is to be paid directly into
their bank accounts through the mechanism of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). The
amount will flow to the accounts of the beneficiaries held in destination banks, through
the accredited bank of DAC&FW and sponsoring banks of the States /UTs, using PFMS
portal. The destination bank can be a Schedule Bank, Post office, Rural Bank,
Cooperative Bank or any other Financial Institution.

11. Validity of the list of beneficiaries
The list of beneficiaries identified by States / UTs shall be valid for one year. However,
States / UTs can upload names of eligible beneficiaries who have been identified
subsequently. States / UTs should also implement a mechanism to ensure revision of
the name of the beneficiary in case of mutation / changes in the land record after
uploading list on the portal for updation of the eligible beneficiary details for such lands.
