Source: Scheme of Post Matric Scholarships to the Students Belonging to Scheduled Castes for
Studies in India (effective from 01-07-2010), Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment,
Government of India. Downloaded via sewa.haryana.gov.in (Department of Social Justice,
Empowerment, Welfare of SCs/BCs and Antyodaya, Government of Haryana).

Scheme of Post Matric Scholarship
(Effective from 01-07-2010)

I. Object
The objective of the scheme is to provide financial assistance to the Scheduled Caste students
studying at post matriculation or post-secondary stage to enable them to complete their
education.

II. Scope
These scholarships are available for studies in India only and are awarded by the government of
the State/Union Territory to which the applicant actually belongs, i.e. permanently settled.

III. Conditions of Eligibility
- The scholarships are open to nationals of India.
- These scholarships will be given for the study of all recognized post-matriculation or
  post-secondary courses pursued in recognized institutions, with certain exceptions (e.g.
  Aircraft Maintenance Engineer's Courses, Private Pilot license Courses).
- Only those candidates who belong to Scheduled Castes so specified in relation to the
  State/Union Territory to which the applicant actually belongs, and who have passed the
  Matriculation or Higher Secondary or any higher examination of a recognised University or
  Board of Secondary Education, will be eligible.
- Candidates who after passing one stage of education are studying in the same stage of
  education in a different subject (e.g. I.Sc. after I.A.) will not be eligible.
- Employed students whose income combined with the income of their parents/guardians does not
  exceed the maximum prescribed income ceiling are made eligible to post-matric scholarships to
  the extent of reimbursement of all compulsorily payable non-refundable fees.
- All children of the same parents/guardians will be entitled to receive benefits of the scheme.
- A scholarship holder under this scheme will not hold any other scholarship/stipend at the same
  time.

IV. Means Test
Scholarships will be paid to the students whose parents'/guardians' income from all sources does
not exceed Rs. 2,50,000/- (Rupees Two lakh Fifty thousand only). So long as either of the parents
(or husband, in the case of a married unemployed girl student) is alive, only the income of the
parents/husband from all sources is taken into account. Only where both parents (or husband) have
died is the income of the guardian supporting the student considered. Income certificate is
required to be taken once only, i.e. at the time of admission, for courses continuing for more
than one year.

V. Value of Scholarship
The value of scholarship includes, for the complete duration of the course:
(i) maintenance allowance,
(ii) reimbursement of compulsory non-refundable fees,
(iii) study tour charges,
(iv) thesis typing/printing charges for Research Scholars,
(v) book allowance for students pursuing correspondence courses,
(vi) book bank facility for specified courses, and
(vii) additional allowance for students with disabilities.

(i) Maintenance allowance — rate of maintenance allowance (in Rupees per month), Hostellers /
Day Scholars, by course group:
- Group I (Degree/PG courses in Medicine, Engineering, Technology, Architecture, Management,
  Computer Science, M.Phil/Ph.D, CA/CS/ICWA, LLM, etc.): Rs. 1200 (Hostellers) / Rs. 550 (Day
  Scholars) per month.
- Group II (Professional courses like Pharmacy, Nursing, LLB, Mass Communication, Hotel
  Management; PG courses not covered under Group I): Rs. 820 (Hostellers) / Rs. 530 (Day
  Scholars) per month.
- Group III (Graduate degree courses not covered under Group I & II, e.g. BA/B.Sc/B.Com): Rs.
  570 (Hostellers) / Rs. 300 (Day Scholars) per month.
- Group IV (post-matriculation non-degree courses, e.g. senior secondary Class XI/XII, ITI
  courses, diploma courses in Polytechnics): Rs. 380 (Hostellers) / Rs. 230 (Day Scholars) per
  month.

Commercial Pilot License (CPL) course candidates are provided maintenance allowance at Group I
rates (Rs. 1200/month for hostellers, Rs. 550/month for day scholars), with up to 50 awards per
annum nationally.

(ii) Additional allowances for SC students with disabilities: Reader Allowance for blind scholars
(Rs. 240/month for Group I & II, Rs. 200/month for Group III, Rs. 160/month for Group IV);
transport allowance up to Rs. 160/month for disabled day scholars; escort allowance of Rs.
160/month for severely handicapped day scholars; extra coaching allowance of Rs. 240/month for
mentally retarded and mentally ill students.

(iii) Fees: Scholars will be paid enrolment/registration, tuition, games, Union, Library,
Magazine, Medical Examination and other fees compulsorily payable by the scholar to the
institution or University/Board. Refundable deposits such as caution money and security deposit
are excluded.

(iv) Study Tours: up to a maximum of Rs. 1600 per annum, limited to actual expenditure.

(v) Thesis Typing/Printing Charges: up to a maximum of Rs. 1600 for research scholars.

(vi) Book Allowance for correspondence/distance education courses: annual allowance of Rs.
1200/- for essential/prescribed books.

VI. Selection of Candidates
All eligible Scheduled Caste candidates will be given scholarships subject to the Means Test.
Candidates belonging to one State but studying in another State will be awarded scholarships by
the State to which they belong.

VII. Duration and Renewal of Awards
The award, once made, is tenable from the stage at which it is given to the completion of the
course, subject to good conduct and regularity in attendance, and is renewed year to year
provided the scholar secures promotion to the next higher class. If a Group I scholar fails an
examination for the first time, the award may be renewed; for a second or subsequent failure, the
student bears their own expenses until they secure promotion.

VIII. Payment
Maintenance allowance is payable from 1st April or from the month of admission, whichever is
later, to the month in which examinations are completed. The Government of the State/Union
Territory Administration to which the student belongs pays the scholarship money to selected
students.

IX. Mode of Disbursal of Scholarship
State Government/UT administrations are required to avoid cash payment of scholarship amounts;
payment of scholarship should be made to beneficiaries through their accounts in post
offices/banks.

X. Other Conditions for the Award
The scholarship depends on the satisfactory progress and conduct of the scholar. If a student is
found to have obtained a scholarship by false statements, the scholarship will be cancelled and
the amount recovered, and the student will be blacklisted and debarred from any scholarship
scheme.

XI. Announcement of the Scheme
All the State Governments/UT Administrations will announce, in May-June, the details of the
scheme and invite applications by issuing an advertisement in leading newspapers of the State and
through their respective websites. The applicant should submit the completed application to the
prescribed authority before the last date prescribed for receipt of applications.

XII. Procedure for Applying
An application for scholarship should comprise:
a. One copy of the application for scholarship in the prescribed form.
b. One copy of the passport size photograph with signatures of the student (for fresh
   scholarship).
c. One attested copy of certificates, diploma, degree etc. in respect of all examinations
   passed.
d. A certificate (in original) of Caste duly signed by an authorised Revenue Officer not below
   the rank of Tehsildar.
e. An income declaration by the self-employed parents/guardians, stating definite income from
   all sources by way of an affidavit on non-judicial stamp paper. Employed parents/guardians
   are required to obtain an income certificate from their employer.
f. A receipt in acknowledgement of the scholarship in the previous year, counter-signed by the
   Head of the Institution, if the applicant received a scholarship under this scheme in the
   preceding year.
The complete application shall be submitted to the Head of the Institution, addressed to an
officer specified by the Government of the State/Union Territory to which the student belongs.

XIII. Funding Pattern of the Scheme
The Scheme is implemented by the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations, which
receive 100% central assistance from Government of India for the total expenditure under the
scheme, over and above their respective Committed Liability. All State Governments and Union
Territory Administrations implementing the scheme must furnish data of beneficiaries and
expenditure to Government of India regularly in Quarterly Reports, and designate Grievance
Redressal Officers (GROs) at the State and District levels to redress students' scholarship-
related grievances.
